Project
	This project was a great exercise in moving forward independently on a deliverable. I always try to make people feel included and have struggled with being assertive or trusting my gut. But when communication is lacking and deadlines are nearing, I got a lot of experience making judgement calls and operating independently. Someone needs to step up and act when it’s crunch time, and I’m glad I got to experience being that person. It also gave me practice interpreting and incorporating my teammates work. To help complete assignments, I would ask groupmates to share their individual assignments and I would read through the ones that were shared. It helped me consider other viewpoints and ideas I would not have considered.
	I also got lots of practice using Figma this term. I’d never used Figma before, and the only UI’s I ever make are simple system dialog box style ones. I have friends who use Figma daily in their jobs, so I felt like I was learning an actual and practical skill. It makes it much easier to develop consistent UI’s when you can lay everything out. I plan on using Figma going forward for UI development, and I’ve even started using it in other classes, though mainly to create diagrams. 
Efficacy of design thinking
	It was helpful performing a heuristic analysis on the prototype. I caught many small issues I may not have noticed otherwise. A major finding was that I never let the user choose an export option. I believe that many of the useability heuristics are self-evident, but even so, learning about each of them has been helpful in learning my blind spots. My biggest gaps in useability design were uniformity and matching real world systems. I learned just how inconsistent my UI layouts were, as well as what ideal layouts look like. Before this class, I would never really care if the ‘Back’ button was always in the same spot on each screen. I also tend to abstract things or lay them out in a way that makes sense programmatically, which often deviates from how that information might be presented or handled in the real world.
	As far as advantages, I can see how a systematic approach to useability creates a better product. You want to maximize the people who will buy and use your product, so making it useable by everyone is necessary. Additionally, not everyone has the same skills or knowledge. Focusing on useability means that some users aren’t as disadvantaged as others. However, the downsides are noticeable. Useability design takes a lot of time and can slow down production. In a hierarchy (such as a corporation), this is especially evident. Useability isn’t cheap either. There are costs associated with research, prototyping, and testing, and it seems like the bill can run high on those. For smaller projects, this may become too prohibitive. 
Ideas 
