CS 432 Week 1

Disc:
Hello everyone! My name is Zack Sherman and I'm a CS major in my (hopefully) last year. I live in Oregon City and work full time as a controls specialist for a financial institution. I'm hoping blend my knowledge of operations and controls with computer science, to make a fruitful and exciting career. 

I took this class because I am interested in Machine Learning. I believe ML methods are important to understand and powerful statistical tools. I have read a fair amount on the subject, but I hope this class will provide opportunity to implement what I've learned. I think these methods are going to be valuable tools at my disposal later in my career. I hope to understand ML methods enough to implement them into my projects, either to achieve the desired function of the project, or to help automation. I don't have a particular career in mind but as long as it provides interesting problems to solve, I'll be happy. 


A1
Topic: “Do health care costs affect spending habits and, if so, what habits are most impacted.”
DS1: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/ahmedmohamed2003/spending-habits
Reformat so label is healthcare spending, and the rest are spending in the respective categories etc.
DS2: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/asaniczka/us-cost-of-living-dataset-3171-counties
Reformat so label is healthcare is categorical (ie, low moderate high) for their state. Normalize data with respect to each states average.
Intro
Healthcare can be a substantive cost for US citizens. Even with Health Insurance, costs for emergency visits and specialized care can balloon to nigh unpayable amounts. For example, child delivery in a hospital, which is considered a ubiquitous life experience in the US, averages a cost of around 3,000 dollars for the insured and 20,000 for the uninsured. An emergency appendectomy averages around 8,000 in final cash cost, according to one insurance company. Additionally, these emergencies are on top of expected healthcare costs, like check-ups, prescriptions, dental exams, and premiums. Due to this cost, it is noted that many people forgo basic healthcare actions. These facts raise questions concerning the quality of life for both those that use healthcare and those who don’t. 
Presently, the US healthcare system is largely privatized and does not offer universal healthcare. While this is good for medical innovation and technology, it also means that costs are inflated when compared to other countries. This has resulted in roughly 1 in 4 Americans skipping recommended medical intervention due to the cost. This is a substantial number of individuals being impacted. If we consider that the CDC reports that 5% of individuals need hospitalization per annum and that this cumulative chance indicates an extremely high likelihood to need medical intervention during an individual’s life, this impacts almost every citizen. 
This paper concerns the specific question of how healthcare costs affect spending habits and what those effects are. It is understood that, as healthcare costs for families increase, other types of spending must decrease, and that the inverse and the contrapositive are also true. This paper attempts to analyze what categories experience the largest fluctuation with respect to healthcare costs. This should provide insights into the quality-of-life changes that come from having health care costs. For example, does a larger healthcare bill indicate that these individuals are more at risk for being underhoused, malnourished/underfed, or financially vulnerable.


Why
	I’ve worked in the banking sector for 10 years and have considerable experience with personal finances. Additionally, at 32, I’m needing to reconcile my miserliness with my bodies need for medical attention. I have greatly ignored any sort of medical care as an adult out of fear that it would drain my savings or saddle me with copious debt. I chose this topic because I’m familiar with financial topics, and that it would help me address my own fears. Additionally, I know that I’m not the only person who feels similarly. I hope that this topic is relevant to many others as well. 

DS1 Description
This dataset is synthetically generated list of 10,000 transactions across 200 individuals. It has 8 variables. It was obtained from Kaggle. It is a mixed dataset, though we anticipate our cleaning process will make it purely quantitative. The original label is intended to be the customer ID, but our cleaned dataset will instead have healthcare spending as the label.
Dataset features
•	Customer ID
o	A qualitative variable that indicates who made the transaction
•	Category
o	A qualitative categorical variable that groups transactions into general domain
•	Item
o	A qualitative variable that indicates the specific purchased item
•	Quantity
o	A quantitative variable that describes the amount of the item that was purchased
•	Price per Unit
o	A quantitative variable which reflects the per-unit cost of the specified item
•	Total Spent
o	A quantitative variable that reflects the total of the transaction
•	Payment method
o	A qualitative variable indicating how the purchase was done.
•	Location
o	A categorical variable which groups transactions based on purchase location, such is Online, In-store, etc.
•	Transaction Date
o	A qualitative variable for when the transaction was performed.
Cleaning methodology
	Presently, each row of the data represents a transaction. We want each row to instead reflect a single user. To do this, the transactions must be collated by Customer ID and then condensed. To better illustrate this, we have laid out the features of the desired format below (note that Customer ID becomes the index for each row and that each feature is quantitative):
•	Healthcare
o	The sum of all healthcare costs for an individual
•	Groceries
o	The sum of all grocery costs for an individual.
•	Shopping
o	The sum of all shopping costs for an individual
•	Subscriptions
o	The sum of all subscriptions or memberships for an individual
•	Housing and Utilities
o	The sum of all housing costs for an individual
•	Transportation
o	The sum of all transportation costs for an individual
•	Food
o	The sum of all food establishment costs for an individual
•	Personal Hygiene
o	The sum of all hygiene costs for an individual
•	Fitness
o	The sum of all fitness costs for an individual
•	Travel
o	The sum of all travel expenses for an individual
•	Hobbies
o	The sum of all hobby expenses for an individual
•	Friend Activities
o	The sum of all social activity expenses for an individual
•	Gifts
o	The sum of all gift costs for an individual
•	Total
o	The total expenditure by an individual
•	Healthcare ratio
o	The ratio of healthcare cost to total expenditures
•	Average Food
o	The average price of the grocery transactions and food transactions
•	Average housing
o	The average price of the individuals housing transactions
•	Average recreation
o	The average price of the Hobbies, Friend Activities, subscriptions, and shopping
•	Average Travel
o	The average price of each travel expense.
To achieve this format, we begin by creating a new dataset with 200 rows and each of the above columns plus 
DS2 Description

The second dataset contains budget information of 1877 counties around the US. It describes the average spending of households by category and household size. It has a total of X entries and Y features. After cleaning the dataset, the label will be a categorical description of how that family’s healthcare spending relates to that state’s average.
Data features
•	Case_id
o	A categorical identifier for the county’s region
•	State
o	The state that the county resides in
•	isMetro
o	A Boolean that describes whether the county is part of a metropolitan area
•	Areaname
o	A qualitative string that provides the colloquial name of the region
•	County
o	The name of the county
•	Family_member_count
o	A categorical descriptor of how many parents and children are in the household.
•	Housing_cost
o	The estimated housing cost for a family of the given size in the county
•	Food_cost
o	The estimated food cost for a family of the given size in that county
•	Transportation_cost
o	The estimated cost of transportation in that county
•	Healthcare_cost
o	The estimated cost of healthcare in that county
•	Other_necessities_cost
o	The estimate cost of unlisted essentials in that county
•	Childcare_cost
o	The estimated cost of childcare in that county
•	Taxes
o	The estimated tax cost for that county
•	Total cost
o	The estimated total cost of living in that county
•	Median_family_income
o	The median income for a family of this size in the county
Cleaning methodology.
Presently, the data represents families of all sizes. While this is fantastic data to have, we want to reduce the number of independent variables in the data. Given the scope of this project, only households with a size of 1 will be examined. After dropping all rows with a family member count greater than 1, our data looks as follows:
We can then iterate through the data and aggregate the healthcare income by state. From this, we can qualify each individual’s healthcare spending based on the state-wide average. We group the spending into 5 categories: Very Low, Low, Average, High, Very High. This gives us our desired label and looks as follows:
Finally, we drop the following features, as they are not relevant attributes to our study: case_id, isMetro, areaname, county, family_member_count, and childcare_cost. To ensure our data is reliable, we drop any rows with invalid entries. The result looks as follows:
We want to make sure that our label data follows the normal distribution expected. To verify that, we graph the frequency of each categorical label across our data:
Additionally, we want to make sure that each state is equally represented. We can also chart the frequency that each state occurs:
Finally, we can examine the total expenditures for each individual. By using a box plot, we can ascertain if there are any extreme outliers: 


A3
Members and Roles
Justin Barreras: Team Leader and Project Coordinator
Zack Sherman: Team Coordinator and Project Leader
Team:
Group 39
Communication Method
The groups primary communication will be done via Discord, with email as a backup. This communication will be done through direct messages, and possibly a discord channel if the need arises.
Members are expected to respond to respond within 6 hours of any message sent between the hours of 8:00 am and 8:00 pm pacific standard time. This timeframe is carried over to the following day if needed. For example, a message sent at 7:00 pm should be replied to by 2:00 pm of the following day. The requirement is that messages are addressed within 24 hours of receipt.
Members are expected to use Github as the primary version control system. All new additions require testing of entire project functionality. While daily progress is not required, members are required to checkout the current version each time they make additions. As a consequence, members are required to push their current work after each session (within reason). This ensures that all members are operating on the same codebase and should eliminate most merge conflicts.
Team Policies
Group meetings shall be conducted with respect for members and the process. During meetings, all members are encouraged to share and will be allowed an opportunity to bring forth any ideas relevant to the project. Any disagreements should be addressed fairly. If disagreements cannot be resolved simply, each member should formalize their argument and present that argument to the opposite party. If no agreement can be reached, the group shall decide the outcome using a mediator. If no mediator is available, a decision can be reached using chance.
The project will be managed through a Github repository. All members will have shared access with the ability to checkout the current version, as well as to submit pull requests. A Github project will also be created to track user stories, features, and requirements.
Team members are expected to take the following actions when encountering the given situation.
1.	Member is confused about what tasks to do.
a.	Member should reach out to the project leader (or any project member) for clarification on tasks.
2.	Member is unsure what the requirement of their tasks are.
a.	The member should first review the assignment rubric for guidance. If confusion still exists, the member should then review the Github Project and read any relevant user stories. If the member is still unsure, the member should contact the team leader for guidance. If the team leader is unsure at this point, they should, as appropriate, create an Ed post, reach out to staff member, or perform additional research.
3.	Do not hear back from another team member within 24 hours.
a.	An additional message should be attempted (depending on timeframe and urgency). If no contact is established, the member should move forward independently as best they are able. This includes making decisions regarding the project, completion of assignments, and submission of assignments. If contact is not reestablished, the group member should reach out to the Teaching Staff.
4.	Fall behind in their work.
a.	The member should coordinate with other group members as soon as possible to share the current state of their work. Any tasks that the member cannot complete should be divided amongst other group members to ensure timely completion.
5.	Think they will fall behind due to exigent circumstances.
a.	The situation should be communicated as early as possible to other group members. Details regarding the situation are not necessary, as members are trusted to reserve this process for genuine needs. The group will anticipate that this member will be unable to contribute to their current assigned tasks, and these tasks should be divided amongst other group members.
6.	Does not contribute sufficiently.
a.	If the member self-identifies as having not contributed sufficiently, the expectation is that they will pick up extra work in the next assignment. If the member does not self-identify, the team leader is expected to communicate with that member. If a member believes they contributed sufficiently, they are allowed to share with the team leader what they contributed and why that is sufficient.


Sources 
https://www.healthsystemtracker.org/brief/health-costs-associated-with-pregnancy-childbirth-and-postpartum-care/
https://cost.sidecarhealth.com/ts/appendix-removal-cost-by-state
https://news.gallup.com/poll/698042/americans-experience-healthcare-state.aspx
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/hus/topics/hospitalization.htm
