Problem 48 - Rotate an 'image'

Initially I figured this would be easy as pie; Just write a rotation matrix and transform the original matrix. Unfortunately, the rules of the problem explicitly forbid this approach. I had a very strong intuition that this problem could be solved iteratively and recursively. Afterall, solving a 4x4 meant solving a 3x3 which meant solving a 2x2. This revealed that we only need to solve the outermost 'layer' of the image before pressing onward. Working up from a 2x2 to a 4x4, I recognized an immediate pattern: The ith index of the jth row goes to the nth index of ith row, which moves to the n-ith index of the nth row, which moves to the jth index of the n-ith row. All this to say, there is cyclicalness to the algortihm.
This was an interesting problem because it let me explore a few different ways of solving it and learning why some of those ways would simply not work. After reading the editorial, I feel silly that I didn't think to Transpose then Reverse the original matrix. I can use this problem in future interviews to demonstrate not only being able to solve a problem within constraints, but also how I might challenge those constraints and demonstrate additional knowledge. For example, explaining how this could be solved trivially with Linear Algebra not only demonstrates knowledge in that domain but also an ability to think beyond what is required.

Problem 37 - Valid Sudoku Checker

This problem was much easier than the first. My solution consisted of checking each row and then the 'transpose' row associated. Each value would be added to a string, and duplicates were checked as it went. Whenever the top left of a box is encountered, it then checks that box in a similar manner. I think I'm a pretty intuition oriented person, and I think my algorithm shows that intuitiveness. For example, I could have used sets instead of strings to reduce runtime when checking for membership. However, I think sets and hashmapping are not always intuitive or expected, expecially on a problem of this size. Many of the example solutions feel very 'hacky', when the problem doesn't need to be. For example, one solution involved bitmasking. From my own experiences working in binary and hex, you will reduce the readability of your code by 50% the moment you do some hacky stuff with it.
I think if this comes up in an interview I can demonstrate how my solutions are not only considering efficiency, but readability and maintainability. I think this can show to employers that I'm thinking critically about my projects and trying to produce well rounded code. Afterall, my compiler is much smarter than I am.
