1. Table of design areas and assignments
Introduction.
    Our project aims to create an Artificial Life simulation using a bottom-up approach. Our design philosophy is that complex phenotypes and attributes will arise solely through the interaction of small building blocks like genes and organs. In addition to being highly emergent, we also need our system to track statistics, and be visually interesting in some way. Breaking down these requirements, we can divide our task into several functional areas. The first being that 'Emergent genomes are created via reproduction and mutation'. The genome that decodes into each organism must have meaningful changes applied to it over time. Without this, our organisms would never evolve. This leads to the second functional area: 'Agent-to-Agent interactions'. Our organisms have to interact in meaningful ways, which means defining acceptable interactions and the decision system for making those actions. We also need to consider our 3rd area: 'Enironment Generation". We need a system that the organisms can populate and move through. All of these tie into 'Visual Representation', as we need our simulator to depict these interactions in a way that is understandable and interesting. 'Live simulation state management' would then be the system that coordinates all these events in real time. Finally, if we intend to track data during a simulation we need a well defined data schema and a database to manage it all. This goes in our last functional area: 'Data schema and statistics.
Content.
    To represent the genome, we should use a modified genetic cartesian programming method (GCP). GCP represents the complete organism as a connected graph of nodes in a grid shape, almost resembling a neural net. This model is highly effective because it allows for complexity and for non-coding genes. However, this requires well defined inputs and outputs. Since we want these to vary between organisms, this approach seems quite daunting. Instead of an acyclic graph, we can house our genome as a linked list and still get many benefits offered by GCP.
    At its core, each genome is a bitstring of long length. This bitstring gives instructions on creating an agent in the simulation. When a 'start' opcode is detected at the current read frame, a new dna node is created. This node has 4 attributes: start, params, non-coding, and next. 'Start' simply contains the opcode that generated the structure, while 'params' are all bits that decode into functional aspects of the structure. It then continues reading every frame, appending the results to the non-coding section of the node. When a new 'start' opcode is detected, the current node is halted and it now points to a new node. Thus, we can get small portions of the genome for a gene, all of the genome for a gene, or the entirety of the genome. This solves potential reading frame issues that arise in linear genetic programming.
    Dividing up the genome like this allows us to approach mutation and reproduction in a variety of ways, some parallelling systems in nature. For breeding, I propose a relatively simple method: Stochastic Crossover. Transcription for the child genome begins at a random parents first node. At each node thereafter, there is a small chance that transcription will begin at the other parents next node. This imitates chromesomal crossover and allows offspring to inherit from both parents.
    Mutation will occur at each node during transcription. There are 9 types of mutation I would recommend: random bitflip, weighted bitflip, increment and decrementing of frames, retrotransposition, duplication, deletion, insertion, inversion, and translocation

1. random bitflip: Each bit in the bitstring has an exceptionally small chance to be negated. This could be seen as a parallel to somatic mutations like UV damage. The chance should be exceedingly small, as this could have disasterous consequences for the organism.
2. weighted bitflip: instead of the flip occuring anywhere, and potentially creating a frameshift mutation, flipping is more likely to occur inside of a parameter. This makes it more likely that the change only affects the phenotype of a gene in a small way.
3. incrementing frames: Real dna has considerable redundancy built into it, and this method could imitate that. Having opcodes occupy a range of values means that increments would have little effect until it suddenly does.
4. retrotransposition: A common cause of genetic variation in nature, this method causes a gene to be copied and inserted elsewhere into the genome. This is the primary way that additional genetic material is added to a genome.
5. Duplication: Similar to retrotransposition, duplication copies a gene and pastes it immediately. This causes identical genes to cluster together on the genome. This method allows organs to specialize further.
6. Deletion: Deletion can occur at a single base, or an entire gene. This mutation enables offspring to trim chaff from the genome, as well as to improve survivability.
7. Insertion: The opposite of deletion. This should be rarer and typically unnoticeable. However, additions into non-coding sections can result in new genes created in these areas.
8. Inversion: Sections of the bitstring are reversed. In humans, this typically is not noticeable and has little impact on phenotype.
9. Translocation: A subsection of a gene is transplanted to another gene, potentially allowing positive parameters to be moved around the organism.

