900047 – Evloution as a theme 1990
Macro evolution
Large pop in environ – not based on differential equations
Genotype (bit string) phenotype (program embedded in genotype)
Study natural evolution
Issues with methodology
	What is life and what is an organism.
	How to be sure behavior isn’t guided or deterministic.
	How to represent organism
Code program as a bit string and do bit level mutations. 
Start with pop of random organisms (did this cause a faster evolution rate?_

Artificial ants did not have built in ability to coordinate sensory inputs with motor output. After 10 generations 20-80% of population had ability and was nearly perfect at the task.
Uses finite state automata
Memory less important, Genetics is space efficient.
Pure random genetics very rarely produces an effective organism.
Early evolution focuses on competency, later generations specialize.
High mutation rate means more of population is ineffective

9780262 Modeling evo of mimicry
Cellular automata used to represent a pattern which is how the species displays themselves and to preditors.
Hopfield network for memory of patterns
Crossover transfer then mutation
Sets goals, allows animals to select mates.
Sets weight to zero and use Hebbian learning
Subpopulations arise that exploit the predators recognition of unplalatable features
Subpopulations arose from predators that could recognize different patterns
Some initial conditions caused all prey to be consumed or all predators to die out.
Fixed memory limits.

Ebsco -10/13 comprehensive overview
Develop heuristics based on insects, such as colony behavior
ACO can be used for combinatorial solutions.
EC use in robotics using Hebbian learning with neural net
Use in computer graphics and character/agent design.
Heavy use in development of intelligent AI in games and entertainment, as Alife allows for AI model to upgrade itself and discover new strategies.
Can be used in Music to allow pleasant music to naturally evolve from user evaluation
User evaluation is then stored and used to train a NN
User is often bottle neck in these application.

Genetic algorithm lit review
GA’s are search based algoriths
Chromosomes are represented as binary strings
Crossover then mutation
Image processing, GA tends to avoid local extreme traps.
The fitness function can be mutated as well and applied to different domains.

PIIS0169 Species delimitation
Use Machine learning to analyze Genome and cluster populations into a holotype.
RNN has memory limits compared to MM
Can track genetic drift and paint how a species may have evolved.

Tj taylor
Too long

Ebsco Abandoning Objective
Fitness functions often reach local opima and can restrict evolution
If selection pressure is to high, deviation is punished too much for evolution.
Deception – if lower order building blocks do not lead to a global optiumum
What about nature causes complexity to increase?
Early open-ended simulations developed complex behaviors, but innovation slows with time.
Uses NE – NEAT – to evolve ANN
	Causes incremental growth and allows for specialization later.
Rewards novelty instead.
Measures distance of behavior from previous entities, saves individuals of sufficient distance.
Novelty search was substantially faster than a fitness approach, but only if the space of possible behaviors is constrained..

Lecnotes
What is life. 
	Reproduction, maintenance, metabolism, etc
	Categorize and control events in surrounding but they must be relevant.
Focus on self organizing behavior. Attractors exist in state space that cause initial conditions to converge to small areas (attractor basins)
Bifurcation – small changes in parameters cause gradual changes in trajectory, but certain points in the parameter space cause extreme sudden changes. Close to these points, sensitivity increases
GTYPE and PTYPE
GYTPE is rules of dynamics (initial conditions)
PTYPE is description of behavior 

Link 1 – The surprising creativity
Easy for algorithm to exploit fitness function, easier than achieving outcome.
Sometimes GA can manipulate fitness function directly.
Agents learn to respond to evaluation tools and hide information.
Agents could exploit imperfect physics and math tools.
Agents can evolve unexpected tools to optimize fitness.
Sometimes optimal solutions only occupy a small genetic space, and good enough solutions are very very broad. Optima can be poor in practice and less robust.
Some genes overlapped with vital genes in genome, cause these genes to be hidden or protected.
